---
title: Programming Languages and Paradigms Book
---

I could take many of the blog posts I've written and make them into a book, slash use them to
revamp Brigitte's book. There is a pretty nice narrative building up.

1. Expressions, values, simple types, and recursive algorithms.
    - Binding and scope.
    - Analyzing programs by typechecking and by tracing.
    - Nontermination.
2. Algebraic data types, recursive types, and lists.
    - data type definitions with constructors
    - Pattern matching
    - Connecting recursive algorithms with recursive types.
3. Higher-order functions and types.
    - Passing functions: `map` and `filter`, the bread and butter of functional programming.
    - Computing functions: partial application, code generation.
    - Bridging higher-order and first-order languages: defunctionalization.
4. Explicit control flow: continuation-passing style.
    - Relating `option` with success and failure continuations.
    - Defunctionalized CPS code and the ubiquity of stacks.
5. Reasoning about recursive programs by induction.
    - transformations of lists: append, reverse, map, fold, sum.
    - soundness of TR transformation with arithmetic
    - soundness of CPS translation
    - soundness of defunctionalization
6. Surveying language features:
    - Modules
    - Exceptions
7. Mutable state:
    - object-oriented programming
    - ephemeral data structures, destructive updates
    - functional programming: generators
8. Lazy programming and infinite data structures
