---
title: Tetris as an EFI application
---

Ever turn on a computer and wish you could just boot right in to Tetris?
No?
Well, in case the urge ever did strike you, it's now a solved problem!
Provided, of course, that your computer runs UEFI.

UEFI is a specification for a software layer between an operating system and a
computer's firmware. In some way, it replaces the BIOS, which is great because
BIOS was never really formally specified. This comes with numerous
disadvantages, the most important one being that you can't quite be *sure* what
services a particular motherboard's BIOS will provide.
UEFI on the other hand mandates the presence of many services and provides a
mechanism for performing service discovery.
For example, UEFI provides a way to access a framebuffer on the computer's
monitor, to generate random numbers, to set and wait for timers, and to read
input peripherals such as a keyboard and mouse. And these are precisely the
ingredients necessary to bake a Tetris cake.

I'll show you in this article how I compile EFI applications using the
gnu-efi library, access the framebuffer and keyboard, and use timers, all by
using UEFI services. I wasn't able to get UEFI's random number generator to
work, so I instead implemented a
[linear congruential generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_congruential_generator)
and seeded it with the current time, so I'll show you how to access the system
time.

Requirements
------------

I use Linux as my development platform, so the instructions will be specific to
Linux.

To compile EFI applications, you'll need the `gnu-efi` library, and the
following programs:
- `objcopy`
- `clang`
- `ld`

To run them, you'll need the following programs:
- `sfdisk`
- `mkfs.fat`
- `dd`
- `qemu-system-x86_64` and the OVMF firmware

Compiling EFI applications
--------------------------

The UEFI specification requires that EFI applications be stored in the Portable
Executable (PE) format. This makes compiling EFI applications on Linux somewhat
of a pain since Linux uses ELF files for executables, so this is the default
output format for compilers.
Although in principle it's possible to build a cross-compiler to generate a PE
file directly containing the EFI application, I found it easier to generate an
ELF shared object file and convert it to PE using `objdump`.
There's one additional consideration when using this approach: although an ELF
file is being generated, the generated machine code needs to use the MS ABI
instead of the Linux ABI. The ABI defines what registers are used in what order
when calling functions, and the UEFI spec requires the Microsoft way of doing
things.

Here's an adapted except of the Makefile I use for compiling a hello world program.
You may need to adjust some paths to suit your Linux distribution.
```
CC=clang
EFI_INCLUDES=\
    -I/usr/include/efi \
    -I/usr/include/efi/protocol \
    -I/usr/include/efi/x86_64

EFI_CFLAGS=\
    -Wall \
    -Werror \
    -ffreestanding \
    -fno-stack-protector \
    -fpic \
    -DHAVE_USE_MS_ABI \
    -fshort-wchar \
    -mno-red-zone \
    $(EFI_INCLUDES)

EFI_CRT_OBJ=/usr/lib/crt0-efi-x86_64.o
EFI_LDS=/usr/lib/elf_x86_64_efi.lds

EFI_LDFLAGS=\
    -nostdlib \
    -znocombreloc \
    -T $(EFI_LDS) \
    -shared \
    -Bsymbolic \
    -L/usr/lib

.PHONY: all
all: hello.efi

# Use objcopy to convert the ELF file to PE format.
%.efi: %.so
    objcopy -j .text -j .sdata -j .data \
    -j .dynamic -j .dynsym  -j .rel \
    -j .rela -j .reloc -j .eh_frame \
    --target=efi-app-x86_64 $^ $@

hello.so: main.o
    $(LD) -o $@ $(EFI_CRT_OBJ) $^ $(EFI_LDFLAGS) -lefi -lgnuefi

%.o: %.c
    $(CC) $(EFI_CFLAGS) -c -o $@ $^
```

When adding a new `.c` file to the project, I add a corresponding `.o` entry to
the dependencies of `hello.so`, so it gets compiled and linked into the final
application. Sadly this Makefile doesn't detect changes to header files; this
could be added by using the compiler's dependency analysis features, but I can't
be bothered to figure that out just get. Instead I just occasionally recompile
from scratch.

Hello world
-----------

So what goes in `main.c`? Fairly normal looking C code, to be honest!
The UEFI firmware that launches our application has already put the processor in
protected mode, and on 64-bit platforms has already switched the processor into
long mode, with an identity page mapping. (To my understanding, this means
virtual addresses coincide with physical addresses in memory.)
The upshot is that we don't need to write assembly code to do this processor
mode switching ourselves, as we would have needed to if we were writing a
BIOS-based "OS loader".

When launched by the UEFI firmware, our application is in a pre-boot stage
in which numerous "boot services" are available. To work, these services use up
a (minimal) amount of the computer's memory and CPU resources. In a realistic
OS, these services can be disabled and their resources reclaimed by calling
`EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.ExitBootServices()`, after which full control of the platform
is given to the EFI application, so that it may for example launch an OS kernel.

Even after boot services have been exited, the UEFI firmware provides a few
_runtime services_. Broadly speaking, these allow access to the computer's
clock, to EFI variables, and to reboot the computer. Nothing particularly
advanced. If the application doesn't call
`ExitBootServices()`, then it can return back into the UEFI firmware and the
firmware can launch other applications. This is useful for implementing
diagnostic services that can be run from the UEFI shell.
I don't call `ExitBootServices()`, since all the services needed to
implement Tetris wouldn't be available anymore.

Enough talk. Let's see hello world already!

```
#include <efi.h>
#include <efilib.h>

EFI_STATUS efi_main(EFI_HANDLE image_handle, EFI_SYSTEM_TABLE *system_table) {
    InitializeLib(image_handle, system_table);
    Print(L"Hello world!\n");
    return EFI_SUCCESS;
}
```

Surprisingly simple! Instead of the standard library (which isn't available), we
include the EFI headers. Our entry point is `efi_main` instead of `main`, and
instead of an `int` we return an `EFI_STATUS`.
Our entry point gets two parameters.

- `image_handle` is an `EFI_HANDLE` that refers to the image that contains the
  currently running application.
- `system_table` is a pointer to an `EFI_SYSTEM_TABLE` structure, which contains
  information about the system. Especially, it contains a pointer to an
  `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES` structure and a pointer to an `EFI_RUNTIME_SERVICES`
  structure.
  As I mentioned before, the former will work only until we call
  `ExitBootServices()`.

`InitializeLib()` is a function provided by the `gnu-efi` library, and it sets
three global variables for us:
`ST` points to the `EFI_SYSTEM_TABLE`,
`BS` points to the `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES`,
`RT` points to the `EFI_RUNTIME_SERVICES`.

It's thanks to these global variables that the `Print` convenience function
provided by `gnu-efi` even works at all!
Something to note about the string literal in this sample code is that it is a
_wide_ string, prefixed with `L`.

Graphics
--------

In order to use proper graphics in our application, we're going to use the
graphics output protocol (GOP).
_Protocols_ define how we interact with EFI services.
They're *basically* objects:
a protocol is a structure with some data and function pointers in it, and
generally these functions all take the structure itself as the first argument.
First, we need to obtain a reference to an `EFI_GRAPHICS_OUTPUT_PROTOCOL`
structure. We can do this using the `EFI_BOOT_SERVICES.LocateProtocol`, which
loops through all devices on the system until one with the requested protocol
can be found.

```
EFI_STATUS status;
EFI_GUID gop_guid = EFI_GRAPHICS_OUTPUT_PROTOCOL_GUID;
EFI_GRAPHICS_OUTPUT_PROTOCOL *gop;

status = BS->LocateProtocol(
  &gop_guid,
  NULL,
  &gop);

if(EFI_ERROR(status))
  return status;
```

Equipped with the GOP, we can enumerate available video modes on the display
device until we find a suitable one. Setting the video mode will clear the
screen to black.

```
EFI_GRAPHICS_OUTPUT_MODE_INFORMATION *info;
UINTN size;

for(int i = 0; i < gop->Mode->MaxMode; i++) {
  if(EFI_ERROR(
       (status =
        gop->QueryMode(gop, mode_i, &info_size, &info))))
    return status;

  if(!mode_is_suitable(info)) {
    continue;
  }

  if(EFI_ERROR(
       (status = gop->SetMode(gop, mode_i))))
    return status;
}
```

And I define `mode_is_suitable` with

```
int
mode_is_suitable(
  EFI_GRAPHICS_OUTPUT_MODE_INFORMATION const * const info) {
  //
  UINTN h = info->VerticalResolution;
  UINTN w = info->HorizontalResolution;
  return w == 640 && h == 480 &&
    info->PixelFormat == PixelBlueGreenRedReserved8BitPerColor;
}
```

So the above code enumerates all video modes until it finds `640x480` with
24-bit blue-green-red color. A few other pixel formats are supported by UEFI:

* `PixelRedGreenBlueReserved8BitPerColor` is 24-bit red-green-blue color.
  I was surprised that this video mode wasn't supported by my emulator.
* `PixelBitMask` indicates that the format is represented by a bitmask stored in
  (in my example) in the `info->PixelInformation` member of type
  `EFI_PIXEL_BITMASK`.
  This structure consists for four `UINT32` values, each a bitmask for a
  separate color channel (and one for the reserved bits).
* `PixelBltOnly` indicates that a physical framebuffer is not available and that
  all graphics output must be done using the `Blt()` function of the GOP.
  This function copies a rectangle of pixels from memory onto the screen.

When the video mode is set, `gop->Mode` is adjusted to reflect the new video
mode.
Since we demanded the `PixelBlueGreenRedReserved8BitPerColor` pixel format, a
framebuffer is available, and we can obtain an `EFI_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS` for, which
is basically a `void*`. I cast this to a pointer to a structure type that
represents the different color channels.

```
typedef struct bgr {
  UINT8 blue;
  UINT8 green;
  UINT8 red;
  UINT8 reserved;
} bgr;

bgr * const framebuffer = (bgr*)gop->Mode->FrameBufferBase;
```

And on top of this abstraction, it's not hard to build some basic drawing
primitives. Something to note about the framebuffer is that any writes to it are
*immediately* visible on screen. The upshot is that unless you draw extremely
quickly to the screen, tearing will be visible to the user. To speed up drawing
there are a few techniques you can use.

* dirty rectangles: track which rectangles on the screen were modified so that
  only those rectangles are redrawn on the next frame.
* buffering: make all drawing code affect an internal buffer that represents the
  whole screen. When all drawing code is finished, copy the buffer to the
  physical framebuffer.

Of course, you can combine these techniques. I found that simply using buffering
gave acceptable performance. I also used a degenerate form of dirty rectangle
checking: many frames in tetris require no redrawing whatsoever, since changes
occur on screen only when there is user input or when the timer elapses to make
the current tetromino fall down. Therefore I can limit redraws to those situations.
